README.md, before:

[![Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/tree-hugger)](https://pepy.tech/project/tree-hugger)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Python 3.6](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.6-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-360/)
[![Python 3.7](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.7-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-370/)

# tree-hugger
Mining source code repositories at scale easily. Tree-hugger is a light-weight, high level library which provides Pythonic APIs  to mine recursively trough Github repositories.
Tree-hugger is built on top of tree-sitter.

Covered languages:
* Python
* PHP
* Java
* JavaScript
* C++

_System Requirement: Python 3.6_

![Code mining at scale scheme - tree hugger](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-hugger/blob/master/tree-hugger%20schema.PNG)
## Contents

1. [Installation](#installation)

2. [Setup](#setup)

3. [Hello world example](#hello-world-example)

4. [API reference](#api-reference)

5. [Extending tree-hugger](#extending-tree-hugger)
  
    - [Adding languages](#adding-languages)

    - [Adding queries](#adding-queries)

6. [Roadmap](#roadmap)

-------------


## Installation

### From pip:

```
pip install tree-hugger
```

### From Source:

```
git clone https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-hugger.git

cd tree-hugger

pip install -e .
```

_The installation process is tested in macOS Mojave, we have a [separate docker binding](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker) for compiling the libraries for Linux and soon this library will be integrated in that as well_

_You may need to install libgit2. In case you are in mac just use `brew install libgit2`_

## Setup

### Building the .so files

_Please note that building the libraries has been tested under a macOS Mojave with Apple LLVM version 10.0.1 (clang-1001.0.46.4)_

_Please check out our Linux specific instructions [here](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker)_

Once this library is installed it gives you a command line utility to download and compile tree-sitter .so files with ease. As an example - 

```
create_libs python
```

Here is the full usage guide of the command

```
usage: create_libs [-h] [-c] [-l LIB_NAME] langs [langs ...]

positional arguments:
  langs                 Give the name of languages for tree-sitter (php,
                        python, go ...)

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -c, --copy-to-workspace
                        Shall we copy the created libs to the present dir?
                        (default: False)
  -l LIB_NAME, --lib-name LIB_NAME
                        The name of the generated .so file
```

### Environment variables
You can set up `TS_LIB_PATH` environment variable for the tree-sitter lib path and then the libary will use them automatically. Otherwise, as an alternative, you can pass it when creating any `Parser` object.


## Hello world example

1. **Generate the librairies** : run the above command to generate the libraries. 

    In our settings we use the `-c` flag to copy the generated `tree-sitter` library's `.so` file to our workspace. Once copied, we place it under a directory called `tslibs` (It is in the .gitignore).
    
    ⚠ If you are using linux,you will need to use our [tree-sitter-docker](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker) image and manually copy the final .so file.

2. **Setup environment variable** (optional)
Assuming that you have the necessary environment variable setup. The following line of code will create a `Parser` object according to the language you want to analyse: 

**Python**
```python
# Python
from tree_hugger.core import PythonParser
pp = PythonParser()
pp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.py")
pp.get_all_function_names()
Out[4]:
['first_child', 'second_child', 'say_whee', 'wrapper', 'my_decorator', 'parent']
```

**PHP**
```Python 
# PHP
from tree_hugger.core import PHPParser
phpp = PHPParser()
phpp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.php")
phpp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[5] :
['foo', 'test', 'simple_params', 'variadic_param' ]
```

**Java**
```python
# Java 
from tree_hugger.core import JavaParser
jp = JavaParser()
jp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_methods.java")
jp.get_all_class_names() 
Out[6] :
['HelloWorld','Animal', 'Dog' ]
```

**JavaScript**
```python
# JavaScript
from tree_hugger.core import JavascriptParser
jsp = JavascriptParser()
jsp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.js")
jsp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[7] :
['test', 'utf8_to_b64',	'sum', 'multiply' ]
```

**C++**
``` python
from tree_hugger.core import CPPParser
cp = CPPParser()
cp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.cpp")
cp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[8] :
['foo', 'test', 'simple_params', 'variadic_param' ]
```


## API reference


| Language      | Functions        | Methods      | Classes |
| ------------- |-------------|-------------|-------------|
| **Python**        |  all_function_names all_function_doctrings  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  |  all_class_methods  all_class_method_docstrings |  all_class_names  all_class_docstrings |
| **PHP**           | all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params   all_function_bodies | all_class_methods  |  all_class_names |
| **Java**          |   |  all_class_methods   all_method_names_and_params  all_method_bodies   |  all_class_names   |
| **JavaScript**    | all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  |  all_class_methods   |  all_class_names |
| **C++**            |all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  | all_class_methods    |   all_class_names  |

 

## Extending tree-hugger

Extending tree-hugger for other languages and/or more functionalities for the already provided ones, is easy. 

1. ### Adding languages:
Parsed languages can be extended through adding a parser class from the BaseParser class. The only mandatory argument that a Parser class should pass to the parent is the `language`. This is a string. Such as `python` (lower case). Each parser class must have the options to take in the path of the tree-sitter library (.so file that we are using to parse the code) and the path to the queries yaml file, in their constructor.

The BaseParser class can do few things: 
- Loading and preparing the .so file with respect to the language you just mentioned.
- Loading, preparing and parsing the query yaml file. (for the queries, we internally use an extended UserDict class)
- Providing an API to parse a file and prepare it for query. `BaseParser.parse_file`

It also gives you another (most likely not to be exposed outside) API `_run_query_and_get_captures` which lets you run any queries and return back the matched results (if any) from the parsed tree.

We use those APIs once we have called `parse_file` and parsed the file.


2. ### Adding queries: 
Queries processed on source code are s-expressions, they are listed in a `queries.yml`file for each parser class. Tree-hugger gives you a way to write your queries in yaml file for each language parsed.

**Query structure**: A name of a query followed by the query itself. Written as an s-expression. *Example*:

```
all_function_docstrings:
        "
        (
            function_definition
            name: (identifier) @function.def
            body: (block(expression_statement(string))) @function.docstring
        )
        "
```
You have to follow yaml grammar while writing these queries. You can see a bit more about writng these queries in the [documentation of tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/using-parsers#pattern-matching-with-queries). 

Some example queries, that you will find in the yaml file (and their corresponding API from the PythonParser class) - 

```
* all_function_names => get_all_function_names()

* all_function_docstrings => get_all_function_documentations()

* all_class_methods => get_all_class_method_names()
```


## Roadmap


 * Documentation: tutorial on queries writing

 * Write *Parser class for other languages

| Languages     | Status-Finished           | Author  |
| ------------- |:-------------:| :-----:|
| Python     |✅  | [Shubhadeep](https://github.com/rcshubhadeep) |
| PHP      | ✅    |   [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie) |
| Java | ✅      |   [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie)  |
| JavaScript |  ✅  | [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie) | 
| C++ |  ✅ | [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie)  |

Commit message:

core(doc): added the description of the download_libs command

README.md, after:

[![Downloads](https://pepy.tech/badge/tree-hugger)](https://pepy.tech/project/tree-hugger)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Python 3.6](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.6-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-360/)
[![Python 3.7](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.7-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-370/)

# tree-hugger
Mine source code repositories at scale. Easily. Tree-hugger is a light-weight, high level library which provides Pythonic APIs  to mine trough Git repositories (it works on any collection of python files, actually).

Tree-hugger is built on top of [tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/).

Covered languages:
* Python
* PHP
* Java
* JavaScript
* C++

_System Requirement: Python 3.6_

![Code mining at scale - tree hugger](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-hugger/blob/master/tree-hugger%20schema.PNG)
## Contents

1. [Installation](#installation)

2. [Setup](#setup)

3. [Hello world example](#hello-world-example)

4. [API reference](#api-reference)

5. [Extending tree-hugger](#extending-tree-hugger)
  
    - [Adding languages](#adding-languages)

    - [Adding queries](#adding-queries)

6. [Roadmap](#roadmap)

-------------


## Installation

### From pip:

```
pip install tree-hugger
```

### From Source:

```
git clone https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-hugger.git

cd tree-hugger

pip install -e .
```

_The installation process is tested in macOS Mojave, we have a [separate docker binding](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker) for compiling the libraries for Linux and soon this library will be integrated in that as well_

_You may need to install libgit2. In case you are in mac just use `brew install libgit2`_

## Setup

### Getting your .so files

From onwards tree-hugger 0.9 we ship a new command `download_libs`.

If you are working on Debian based Linux or Newer version of MacOS then you should probably just use this command to get the library. At any point of time we will maintain a .so file for both those OSs with all the supported languages in it. 

To get the .so file for your platform you can simply do the following 

```
download_libs
```

Here is the full usage guide of the command

```
usage: download_libs [-h] [--local_file_name LOCAL_FILE_NAME]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --local_file_name LOCAL_FILE_NAME
                        The local file where you want to save the library.
                        Default - my-languages.so
```

### Building the .so files

_Please note that building the libraries has been tested under a macOS Mojave with Apple LLVM version 10.0.1 (clang-1001.0.46.4)_

_Please check out our Linux specific instructions [here](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker)_

Once this library is installed it gives you a command line utility to download and compile tree-sitter .so files with ease. As an example - 

```
create_libs python
```

Here is the full usage guide of the command

```
usage: create_libs [-h] [-c] [-l LIB_NAME] langs [langs ...]

positional arguments:
  langs                 Give the name of languages for tree-sitter (php,
                        python, go ...)

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -c, --copy-to-workspace
                        Shall we copy the created libs to the present dir?
                        (default: False)
  -l LIB_NAME, --lib-name LIB_NAME
                        The name of the generated .so file
```

### Environment variables
You can set up `TS_LIB_PATH` environment variable for the tree-sitter lib path and then the libary will use them automatically. Otherwise, as an alternative, you can pass it when creating any `Parser` object.


## Hello world example

1. **Generate the librairies** : run the above command to generate the libraries. 

    In our settings we use the `-c` flag to copy the generated `tree-sitter` library's `.so` file to our workspace. Once copied, we place it under a directory called `tslibs` (It is in the .gitignore).
    
    ⚠ If you are using linux,you will need to use our [tree-sitter-docker](https://github.com/autosoft-dev/tree-sitter-docker) image and manually copy the final .so file.

2. **Setup environment variable** (optional)
Assuming that you have the necessary environment variable setup. The following line of code will create a `Parser` object according to the language you want to analyse: 

**Python**
```python
# Python
from tree_hugger.core import PythonParser
pp = PythonParser()
pp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.py")
pp.get_all_function_names()
Out[4]:
['first_child', 'second_child', 'say_whee', 'wrapper', 'my_decorator', 'parent']
```

**PHP**
```Python 
# PHP
from tree_hugger.core import PHPParser
phpp = PHPParser()
phpp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.php")
phpp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[5] :
['foo', 'test', 'simple_params', 'variadic_param' ]
```

**Java**
```python
# Java 
from tree_hugger.core import JavaParser
jp = JavaParser()
jp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_methods.java")
jp.get_all_class_names() 
Out[6] :
['HelloWorld','Animal', 'Dog' ]
```

**JavaScript**
```python
# JavaScript
from tree_hugger.core import JavascriptParser
jsp = JavascriptParser()
jsp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.js")
jsp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[7] :
['test', 'utf8_to_b64',	'sum', 'multiply' ]
```

**C++**
``` python
from tree_hugger.core import CPPParser
cp = CPPParser()
cp.parse_file("tests/assets/file_with_different_functions.cpp")
cp.get_all_function_names() 
Out[8] :
['foo', 'test', 'simple_params', 'variadic_param' ]
```


## API reference


| Language      | Functions        | Methods      | Classes |
| ------------- |-------------|-------------|-------------|
| **Python**        |  all_function_names all_function_doctrings  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  |  all_class_methods  all_class_method_docstrings |  all_class_names  all_class_docstrings |
| **PHP**           | all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params   all_function_bodies | all_class_methods  |  all_class_names |
| **Java**          |   |  all_class_methods   all_method_names_and_params  all_method_bodies   |  all_class_names   |
| **JavaScript**    | all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  |  all_class_methods   |  all_class_names |
| **C++**            |all_function_names  all_function_names_and_params  all_function_bodies  | all_class_methods    |   all_class_names  |

 

## Extending tree-hugger

Extending tree-hugger for other languages and/or more functionalities for the already provided ones, is easy. 

1. ### Adding languages:
Parsed languages can be extended through adding a parser class from the BaseParser class. The only mandatory argument that a Parser class should pass to the parent is the `language`. This is a string. Such as `python` (lower case). Each parser class must have the options to take in the path of the tree-sitter library (.so file that we are using to parse the code) and the path to the queries yaml file, in their constructor.

The BaseParser class can do few things: 
- Loading and preparing the .so file with respect to the language you just mentioned.
- Loading, preparing and parsing the query yaml file. (for the queries, we internally use an extended UserDict class)
- Providing an API to parse a file and prepare it for query. `BaseParser.parse_file`

It also gives you another (most likely not to be exposed outside) API `_run_query_and_get_captures` which lets you run any queries and return back the matched results (if any) from the parsed tree.

We use those APIs once we have called `parse_file` and parsed the file.


2. ### Adding queries: 
Queries processed on source code are s-expressions, they are listed in a `queries.yml`file for each parser class. Tree-hugger gives you a way to write your queries in yaml file for each language parsed.

**Query structure**: A name of a query followed by the query itself. Written as an s-expression. *Example*:

```
all_function_docstrings:
        "
        (
            function_definition
            name: (identifier) @function.def
            body: (block(expression_statement(string))) @function.docstring
        )
        "
```
You have to follow yaml grammar while writing these queries. You can see a bit more about writng these queries in the [documentation of tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/using-parsers#pattern-matching-with-queries). 

Some example queries, that you will find in the yaml file (and their corresponding API from the PythonParser class) - 

```
* all_function_names => get_all_function_names()

* all_function_docstrings => get_all_function_documentations()

* all_class_methods => get_all_class_method_names()
```


## Roadmap


 * Documentation: tutorial on queries writing

 * Write *Parser class for other languages

| Languages     | Status-Finished           | Author  |
| ------------- |:-------------:| :-----:|
| Python     |✅  | [Shubhadeep](https://github.com/rcshubhadeep) |
| PHP      | ✅    |   [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie) |
| Java | ✅      |   [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie)  |
| JavaScript |  ✅  | [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie) | 
| C++ |  ✅ | [Clément](https://github.com/CDluznie)  |
